---
layout: post
title: "On Moving to SF"
description: "Musings on changing cities"
tags: [SF, Austin]
---

I was warned that this would happen at some point in my life; for me it happened early last year. On considering new opportunities, I finally decided on one located in SF and reluctantly moved.

My time in Austin had been an important part of my life. The first time I went to Austin was for an internship at [Enthought](https://www.enthought.com/), one of the few Software firms I thought I could genuinely enjoy (they build custom solutions using numerical methods/tooling, which was my primary interest at that time). The internship turned out to be a great experience, both for the work itself; but also, because of, well, Austin. I had no idea that I would end up reconnecting with friends from college, enjoy amazing BBQ, listen to live music, float the San Marcos river, among many, many other things. I fell in love with the city and when extended a full time offer, accepted it gladly.

5 years later, it did seem I had enough of the city, and I started taking interviews for positions outside of Austin. It was a confluence of many different reasons:

* I stopped enjoying the work I did at my previous company. There were changes in team; the great folks left. The ones that remained were still good, but the office stopped being a place that I enjoyed being at
* One of my best friends got a job offer in the Bay and was seriously considering making a move
* I had tried for over a year to look for other opportunities in Austin but had failed miserably (more on that later)

Although Austin is a fantastic city to live in, it still lags behind SF in terms of the exciting technical opportunities to work on. The ones that did sound interesting were too small to consider Visa sponsorship (an important requirement for an immigrant such as myself). The bigger ones were satellite offices of larger tech firms (in fact, the company I worked for itself was _technically_ a satellite office).

So I decided to look outside the city and within a month had multiple job offers from SF, LA and NYC. Perhaps that was what really made me wonder whether Austin was a good place to stay, career-wise. Mobility in the job market is extremely important; it makes both employers and employees stay competent and constantly improve. Without that competition, its easy to feel stuck, and that's exactly what I felt like. I wanted to learn, to grow, to contribute to the growth of my workplace, but it all seemed incredibly hard and frustrating to do at my job, and in my city.

Settling in a new city is incredibly hard: you have to find new friends and social circles, new favorite restaurants, bars, coffee shops, new places where you feel at home and new things that you like to do. Perhaps the hardest thing was to find/create a new social circle: in Austin, it seemed like I had a family that would meet every weekend and hang out. It was a something I looked forward to, and now I had nothing.

Over 6 months in, I feel that the decision to move has been a good one, all things considered. I was lucky to have selected an incredibly talented, smart and empathetic group of individuals to work with, and have learned a lot so far. I look forward to the work that I do, which is exciting, and gives me a sense of purpose, and to the people I work with. Its not all rainbows and unicorns of course; I now have concerns of working too much, about being too absorbed/affected in work politics (which I absolutely detest but seemingly can't avoid). My social circle is growing, slowly but surely, and I've already had many memorable experiences and look forward to many more.

There is still much to explore, and that feeling of exploration, of not knowing about the city and wanting to explore, is amazing. I remember feeling that when I had first moved to Austin, and I feel it now in SF. I haven't been to a single technical meetup yet. I haven't been to the East Bay (!). I haven't been to [Outside Lands](https://www.sfoutsidelands.com/), Napa/Sonoma and many many other interesting places and events. All of that is exciting, and I look forward to the future with a sense of hope and excitement.
